Trump's approval on economy falls in AP-NORC poll, showing new warning signs for president

President Donald Trump's approval rating on the economy has slumped over the past month as the Iran war drives prices higher, according to a new AP-NORC poll, with even Republicans showing less faith in his leadership.

Trump's approval rating on the economy dropped to 30% in April from 38% in a March AP-NORC poll. A similarly low share of US adults, 32%, approve of the president's leadership on Iran, which is unchanged since last month.

The poll was conducted April 16-20, during which time the Strait of Hormuz was reopened by Iran, then closed again.

The president's policies and pronouncements have often been at odds with each other. Gasoline prices — which he promised to slash — jumped after the US attacked Iran in February. His tariffs have kept much of the economy in limbo and hiring has slowed despite his boasts of a "golden age."

Only 33% of US adults approve of Trump's overall job performance, down slightly from 38% last month.

Trump's falling approval ratings could create problems for his party as it tries to defend House and Senate majorities in the midterm elections. The poll finds that Trump is especially weak on cost of living, and enthusiasm about Trump's performance has waned over the past year among his own supporters.

In a sign of just how unpopular Trump's approach on prices has become, the poll found that only about one-quarter of US adults approve of his handling of the cost of living.

The consumer price index climbed 3.3% in March from a year ago, and inflation is slightly higher than the 3% that Trump inherited upon returning to the White House last year.

Trump on Tuesday dismissed the war as a "little journey" and portrayed the roughly 35% jump in oil prices as a positive compared to what he thought would happen. He told CNBC in an interview that he was "surprised" that oil prices were only around $90 a barrel, compared to the $200 that he claimed to have expected.

Only about half of Republicans approve of Trump's handling of the cost of living. Younger Republicans are particularly unhappy — about 6 in 10 Republicans under 45 disapprove of how Trump is handling costs, compared to about 4 in 10 older Republicans.

About three-quarters of US adults described the US economy as "very" or "somewhat" poor in April, up from about two-thirds in February.

About 2 in 10 independents approve of Trump's performance on the economy, down slightly from about 3 in 10 in March. Far more Republicans, 62%, have a positive view of the way Trump is handling the economy, but that is also down from 74% last month.

In general, Republicans are less enthusiastic about Trump's overall performance than they were shortly after he took office. In March 2025, 51% of Republicans "strongly" approved of the way he was handling the presidency, a figure that has dropped to 38% now.

Trump's approval ratings are in line with his predecessor Joe Biden's lowest approval rating in AP-NORC polling — 36% — which came during July 2022 after inflation spiked to a four-decade high.

The AP-NORC poll of 2,596 adults was conducted April 16-20 using a sample drawn from NORC's probability-based AmeriSpeak Panel. The margin of sampling error for adults overall is plus or minus 2.6 percentage points.
