Trump says US will reduce number of troops in Germany 'a lot further' than withdrawal of 5,000

President Donald Trump said on Saturday that the US will significantly reduce its troop presence in Germany, escalating a dispute with Chancellor Friedrich Merz as he seeks to scale back America's commitment to European security.

The Pentagon on Friday had initially announced it would pull some 5,000 troops out of Germany, but when asked Saturday about the reason for the move, Trump didn't offer an explanation and said an even bigger reduction was coming.

"We're going to cut way down. And we're cutting a lot further than 5,000," Trump told reporters in Florida.

Earlier on Saturday, Germany's defense minister appeared to take in stride the news that 5,000 US troops would be leaving his country. Boris Pistorius said the drawdown, which Trump has threatened for years, was expected, and he said European nations needed to take on more responsibility for their own defense. But he also emphasized that security cooperation benefited both sides of the trans-Atlantic partnership.

"The presence of American soldiers in Europe, and especially in Germany, is in our interest and in the interest of the US," Pistorius told the German news agency dpa.

The planned withdrawal faced bipartisan resistance in Washington, with swift criticism from Democrats and concern from Republicans that it would send the "wrong signal" to Russian President Vladimir Putin, whose full-scale invasion of Ukraine recently entered its fifth year.

Trump's decision comes as he seethes at European allies over their unwillingness to join his campaign with Israel against Iran. He has lashed out at leaders like Merz, Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez and British Prime Minister Keir Starmer.

Merz last week criticized the war in Iran, saying the US is being "humiliated" by the Iranian leadership and calling out Washington's lack of strategy.

In another sign of friction, Trump accused the European Union of not complying with its US trade deal and announced plans to increase tariffs on cars and trucks produced in the bloc to 25%, a move that would be particularly damaging to Germany, a major automobile manufacturer.

A pullout of 5,000 soldiers from Germany would amount to about one-seventh of the 36,000 American service members stationed in the country. The Pentagon offered few details about which troops or operations would be affected.

The withdrawal of the 5,000 troops is scheduled to take place over the next six to 12 months. Trump previously said he would pull 9,500 troops from Germany during his first term, but he didn't start the process and Democratic President Joe Biden formally stopped the planned withdrawal soon after taking office in 2021.

Around 80,000-100,000 US personnel are usually stationed in Europe. The US increased its European deployment after Russia launched its full-scale war on Ukraine in February 2022.

Pentagon spokesperson Sean Parnell said the "decision follows a thorough review of the Department's force posture in Europe and is in recognition of theater requirements and conditions on the ground."

A US defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the branches of the US military didn't have prior knowledge of the decision to draw down the 5,000 troops and learned about it "in real time."

Germany hosts several American military facilities, including the headquarters of the US European and Africa commands, Ramstein Air Base and a medical center in Landstuhl. US nuclear missiles are also stationed in the country.

Withdrawal of 5,000 troops from Germany would likely have limited impact on combat power, but "in terms of messaging of US commitment though, it's very different," another US defense official said.

After swift pushback from Democrats on Friday, Republican leaders of both armed services committees in Congress said Saturday they were "very concerned" about the troop withdrawal. Senator Roger Wicker and Representative Mike Rogers said the decision risked "undermining deterrence and sending the wrong signal to Vladimir Putin."

They also said the Pentagon had decided to cancel the planned deployment of the Army's Long-Range Fires Battalion.

NATO spokesperson Allison Hart said the alliance was "working with the US to understand the details of their decision on force posture in Germany." She added that the adjustment "underscores the need for Europe to continue to invest more in defense and take on a greater share of the responsibility for our shared security."
